In this video we're gonna talk about some
of the basic math that we need for this
part of the course.
Don't worry, it's not gonna get too heavy
and we're gonna keep it simple.
So with that, let's just get started.
First, I want to talk about logic and in
particular I want to talk about Boolean
logic, where all values can either be true
or false and there's no gray area. There
is no middle ground. Everything is either
true or it's false, okay?
And so, as we talk about this, I want to
have some abbreviations for obvious
reasons, abbreviate these as H and Z. So
as we go on I don't have to write out true
or false.
Okay. So now, all right, I hope at least
some of you are paying attention out there
behind your computer.
There is no possible logical reason why I
would abbreviate true and false as H and
Z. Let's abbreviate them as T and F,
Like normal people?
Alright.
Now,
It's all on good to be able to have values
that are true and false but it's not too
interesting unless I can combine them in
some way.
So Boolean logic includes the operators
not, and,
Not and an a or.
Now, intuitively, I think you probably
understand these from their definition of
the English words of not, end, and or And
you can just kind of work your way through
what they neded Alright?
But I wanna be mathematically precise
here.
So I'm gonna give you the exact definition
of these three operators.
Now, if I have a variable that can take on
a value true of false,
Let's call it a.
Okay.
Question is what is not A and I'm going to
draw a tree table to show you this.
Okay, the tree table looks like this where
I show all the possible values of A can
either be true or false.
And I'll show you the value of the
expression Not A over here.
So if A is true, Not A is false.
If A is false then not A is true.
Okay and that probably makes intuitive
sense to you or at least I hope it does.
Okay? So let's look at and, and or now all
right.
So I don't just have to have one variable
I can have two Boolean variables,
Let's say A and B.
Then we can look at what does A and B
mean.
Okay? So, I have got more combinations
now.
A could be false.
B could be false.
Or, A could be false and B could be true.
Or, A could be true and B could be false.
Or they both could be true.
And that's it.
Those are the four different combinations
of A and B.
Now, going to have A and B. Intuitively,
you think if A is true and B is true, Then
this also must be true.
So, let's put a true down here.
Now, if either of them are false, then I
can no longer say that both A and B are
true.
Therefore the rest of these combinations
here are false.
Okay and since I don't want to draw
another truth table let's just extend this
one here and look at operator A or, okay
now, A or B.
If they're both false, hopefully, it's
obvious that neither A nor B is true, so
therefore the things going to evaluate to
false. But this expression is true in all
of the cases because at least one of A or
B is true.
Okay.
So if I have the bullion expression a and
b, it's true.
If and only if both a and b are true and
false otherwise.
And if I have the bullion expression A and
or B it's false.
If and only if A and B are both false, and
its true otherwise.
Okay.
So, hopefully this give you an intuitive
understanding of the different logical
operators.
And what I to point out you, don't have to
have simple expressions that only include
one operator.
I could have for instance have A, and.
B or C and.
Not D.
Okay?
And so, you can build this up in
arbitrarily complex ways and you have to
evaluate them in the same way that we
evaluated the simpler expressions.
So you can build a big giant truth table
and you can actually figure out what is
the value of this expression under all
possible inputs.
So we will actually use Boolean Logic in
our program,
So let's take a look at how they work in
Python.
Oka? So I can hand variables that take on
the values true or false.
So in Python, the word's true with a
capital T and false with a capital F
represent these Boolean values.
I can print them and assume and do the
obvious thing.
Okay? You can see true and false show up
here. I can create logical expressions,
So let's put a little separator there.
I can print A or not A.
I can print.
A and B. And print A or B. Okay? let's run
this.
You can see when A is true and B is false.
Nod A is false, A and B is false, and A or
B is true.
This all makes sense, and this is directly
from, from the previous slide.
You can go back and look at the truth
tables if you're a little bit confused
still.
Now, you notice that the.
Boolean logic operators in Python are the
English words, not and, and or and that's
kind of nice cuz it's very easy to see
what's going on here.
Unlike some other programming languages
where they use more cryptic operators for
these things, okay?
And I don't have to limit myself to simple
expressions like that.
I can do the complicated expression that
we saw on the previous slide.
I can print a and b, or c and not d.
Now, I better define.
C and D to be something here.
C equals true.
D equals false.
Let's run this.
And you can see for this set of inputs,
that expression evaluates to true.
And I invite you to sort of walk through
it on your own and make sure that you
understand what's going on.
All right?
So this is how we use Boolean logic inside
Python programs.
So Boolean logic is interesting and useful
in and of itself, but you don't always
have true and false values lying around in
your program.
Instead, you end up generating them a lot
of time.
Okay?
And we generate them using comparison
operators.
Python has six comparison operators.
It has greater than, less than, greater
than or equal to, less than or equal to,
equal to and not equal to.
And these six comparison operators allow
you to take two values, compare them to
each other and generate a boolean.
Alright?
So let's try it out.
So let's say A equals seven greater than
three.
Print A.
Now instead of just assigning true or
false to A we're assigning A to the value
of the expression seven greater than
three.
And we know that seven is greater than
three so I would expect this to print true
and low and behold it does.
Alright?
And there's no reason why I just tapped
out a constance there.
I could say X= eight.
Y=5.
Five.
B=
X greater than or equal to Y.
Print the.
Okay.
Now I've got an expression involving
variable, involving variables and X
greater than or equal to Y.
I would expect that also to evaluate to
true, because eight is, in fact, greater
than or equal to Y and again it does what
it's expected.
Alright and since I used greater than or
equal to here.
I could actually change that to be the
same number, it remains true.
If I take out the equal,= , it becomes
false. Okay?
Alright.
Now, I don't have to just do comparisons
on numbers.
I can also do comparisons on strings.
So I could say, C=hello==hello, Hello""
=,, = Hello."" Right?
Print C.
What's gonna happen here.
This value is true.
Why?
Because the text of the string hello is
the same as the text of the string hello,
and that makes good sense.
Alright and I want to point out here that
we're comparing the text, not the way you
generated it.
If you recall, we can have strings that
use either single or double quotes and
that does not matter here.
I'm comparing the text.
Okay?
So if I actually want to get it to
evaluate to false, I have to change the
actual string.
Now when I compare, it's false.
Okay?
So it's important to remember I'm
comparing the text, not the, the way that
it looks.
Okay, with the single or the double
quotes.
Now I also want to point something else
out about this expression.
Okay.
There is a single equal sign here, and
there is a double equal sign here.
This is a source of a lot of errors for
beginning programmers, and quite frankly,
experienced programmers as well.
The single equal sign is assignment.
Alright?
So, this means, take what's on the right
hand side of the equal sign, evaluate it,
and put the value into the variable that's
on the left.
In this case C,
Alright?
The double equals is, is equal. Tell me if
the left and right are equal to each other
and evaluate to true or false okay?
So try not to get that mixed up although
I'm sure that you will every once in
awhile, and most of the time Python will
give you an error alright, when you mess
it up.
All right, I don't have to just do numbers
or strings or integers or strings.
I can do pretty much any Python type here,
so I could say, hey, is 20.6 less than or
equal to 18.3, printd.'Kay so that should
evaluate to false I should hope.'Kay.
And this is now a good way of generating
these Boolean values.
Using these comparison operators, I can
then combine them, you know, with my
favorite expression from before.
And evaluate everything, okay, with this
combination of values my expression of
values is too true.
Alright so we're gonna see this alone in
python programs where you use these
comparison operators to generate Booleans
then you generate Boolean and you try to
figure out what you like to do next in
your program.
That ends our quick and painless
introduction to the mathematical concepts
of Boolean logic and comparisons.
In the next video we'll see how to use
concepts to build more interesting